<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head><mf-text><![CDATA[
<!-- Markfront header -->

                  **Markfront Reference Manual**

This document describes the features supported by Markfront.

# Markfront Text

## Isolated contents

Figures and sidenotes are distinguished by the syntax of their labels:

|    Reference    |  Result  | Can be a sidenote |
|-----------------|----------|-------------------------|
| `[^sidenote]`   | ¹        | Yes                     |
| `[Figure fig]`  | Figure 1 | No                      |
| `[図:fig]`      | 図1      | No                      |
| `[^Figure fig]` | Figure 1 | Yes                     |
| `[^図:fig]`     | 図1      | Yes                     |

# Markfront XML

## HTML elements

The following HTML elements are supported and styled appropriately.

- `<code>`
- `<ul>`, `<ol>`, `<ll>`
- `<dl>`, `<dt>`, `<dd>`

## Header — `<mf-title>`

~~~~~~~~~~~~xml
<mf-title>I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream</mf-title>
<mf-lead>Harlan Ellison</mf-lead>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

`<mf-title>` inserts a document title. `<mf-lead>` inserts a subtitle and if it exists it must follow `<mf-title>`.

## Lists

~~~~~~~~~~~~xml
<ul>
    <li><p>unordered list</p></li>
</ul>
<ol>
    <li><p>ordered list</p></li>
</ol>
<dl>
    <dt><p>caption</p></dt>
    <dd><p>decsription</p></dd>
</dl>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

HTML lists `<ul>` (unordered list), `<ol>` (ordered list), and `<dl>` (definition list) are supported.

`ul > li` may have one of the following CSS classes:

- `checked` indicates that a checked checkbox should be displayed next the item.
- `unchecked` indicates that an unchecked checkbox should be displayed next the item.

## Code blocks — `<mf-code>`

~~~~~~~~~~~~xml
<mf-codeblock>
    <mf-code type="Python input">&gt;&gt;&gt; x = [1, 2, 3, 4]
&gt;&gt;&gt; [y * 2 for y in x]</mf-code>
    <mf-code type="none output">[2, 4, 6, 8]</mf-code>
</mf-codeblock>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

**`<mf-code>`** displays a code block with syntax highlighting.
`type` attribute is a space-separated string and the first element indicates the syntax name used for syntax highlighting.

One or more `<mf-code>` elements can be wrapped by **`<mf-codeblock>`**.

!!! Warning
    `<mf-code>` is a block element that should not be confused with `<code>`, which is an inline element used to insert a inline code fragment.

!!! TODO: Yet to be written about...
    The semantics of the rest of `type` attribute value.

## LaTeX equations — `<mf-eq>`

~~~~~~~~~~~~xml
<mf-eq-display>
    \Lo(X, \wo) = \Le(X, \wo) + \int_\Omega \Li(X, \wi) ~ f_X(\wi, \wo) ~ | \n \cdot \wi | ~ d\wi
</mf-eq-display>
<p>
    The LLVM target <i>triplet</i> is comprised of <i>five</i> elements. 
    Therefore, <mf-eq>3 = 5</mf-eq>.
</p>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

`<mf-eq>` inserts an inline LaTeX equation. Similarly, `<mf-eq-display>` inserts a display LaTeX equation.

## Admonitions — `<mf-admonition>`

~~~~~~~~~~~~xml
<mf-admonition type="danger">
    <mf-admonition-title>
        Can I have your attention please?!
    </mf-admonition-title>
    <p>
        The message follows...
    </p>
</mf-admonition>
~~~~~~~~~~~~

## Diagrams — `<mf-diagram>`

]]>
<mf-codeblock>
<mf-code type="xml">&lt;mf-diagram&gt;&lt;![CDATA[<![CDATA[
 .---------.
 |  Server |<------.
 '----+----'       |
      |            |
      | DATA CYCLE |
      v            |
 .---------.  .----+----.
 | Security|  |  File   |
 | Policy  +->| Manager |
 '---------'  '---------'
]]>]]&gt;&lt;/mf-diagram&gt;</mf-code>
</mf-codeblock>
<![CDATA[

## Miscellaneous elements

- `<mf-error>` indicates an error encountered while processing `<mf-text>`.

- `<mf-ref>`

<!-- Markfront footer -->
]]></mf-text><script src="browser/markfront.js" data-rel="markfront" />
</head></html>
